---
layout: post
title: "Testing NeuroStars w/ Travis-CI"
excerpt: "Testing and continuous integration with Travis-CI for NeuroStars"
tags: [gsoc, neurostars, biostar, continuous integration, testing, travis-ci]
---

<i class="fa fa-quote-left"></i> *Continuous integration (CI) is the practice, in software
engineering, of merging all developer working copies with a shared mainline several times a day. 
[...] The main aim of CI is to prevent integration problems, referred to as "integration hell"
[...].* 

*CI was originally intended to be used in combination with automated unit tests written through the
practices of test-driven development. Initially this was conceived of as running all unit tests in
the developer's local environment and verifying they all passed before committing to the mainline.
This helps avoid one developer's work in progress breaking another developer's copy. If necessary,
partially complete features can be disabled before committing using feature toggles.* 

*Later elaborations of the concept introduced build servers, which automatically run the unit tests
periodically or even after every commit and report the results to the developers. The use of build
servers (not necessarily running unit tests) had already been practised by some teams outside the
XP community. Nowadays, many organisations have adopted CI without adopting all of XP*
<i class="fa fa-quote-right"></i>   
[Source](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration)

Automated testing is a good practice in software engineering, wise men say. In 
[NeuroStars]({{ site.baseurl }}/neurostars/) we make use of the
[integrated Django testing tools](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/topics/testing/tools/) to
run our unit and integration tests.

During my [GSoC2014]({% post_url 2014-04-21-gsoc2014 %}) we would like to take
this one step forward, using a build server to perform automated testing. I already had some
experience with [Jenkins CI](http://jenkins-ci.org/), but in this case, Roman and I decided to
try [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/).

The main advantage of *Travis CI*, when compared to *Jenkins CI*, is that small Open Source
projects like *NeuroStars* can make use of the free [Travis Continuous Integration Platform](https://travis-ci.org/)
and avoid the burden of managing an actual build server.

Configuring *Travis CI* for a project hosted at *GitHub* is really easy: it's about adding a few
lines to a [YAML file](https://github.com/ialbert/biostar-central/blob/master/.travis.yml).
I also configured [GitHub Webhooks](https://developer.github.com/webhooks/) in my repository, so
that on every `git push` *GitHub* sends a notification to *Travis CI* and a testing session is
triggered in order to test the new code.

Now my workflow is the following:

- write new code;
- test it locally, skip the slowest tests;
- commit and push the code;
- receive an email from *Travis CI* with the results of the complete test session.

I must admit that I am very satisfied with this procedure as it gives me more confidence
about the code I write daily.